GSoC 2024 - 2D visualization for small molecules (#28)
jennaswa/MDAnalysis.github.io: _posts/2024-08-02-gsoc2024_talagayev.md

---
layout: post
title: GSoC 2024 - 2D visualization for small molecules
---

**Contributor**: Valerij Talagayev ([@talagayev](https://github.com/talagayev))

**Mentors**: Cédric Bouysset ([@cbouy](https://github.com/cbouy)), Richard Gowers ([@richardjgowers](https://github.com/richardjgowers)) and Yuxuan Zhuang ([@yuxuanzhuang](https://github.com/yuxuanzhuang))

**Organization**: [MDAnalysis](https://www.mdanalysis.org/)

**Release**: [GSoC 2024: 2D visualization for small molecules Release](https://github.com/talagayev/MDonatello/releases/tag/0.0.1)

> During the Google Summer of Code 2024 I was working on the 2D Visualization of small molecules, which is an important project, that would allow people to easily visualize the molecule that they have in their file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the Google Summer of Code 2024 program I was working on the [2D Visualization of small molecules](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2024/projects/sfy3kuqc), which is an important project, that would allow people to easily visualize the molecule that they have in their file
```

Reviewer: Would recommend linking to your project on the GSoC website

through the selection of the molecule as an `AtomGroup` in `MDAnalysis`.

## Goals of the project

> The goal of the project was to create a code, that would allow the user to select an `AtomGroup` with the help of `MDAnalysis`, which would be used with an RDKit Converter to convert the molecule into an rdkit mol object, which would be used for the visualization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of the project was to create a code, that would allow the user to select an `AtomGroup` with the help of `MDAnalysis`, which would be used with an [RDKit](https://www.rdkit.org/) Converter to convert the molecule into an rdkit mol object, which would be used for the visualization.
```

Reviewer: Perhaps link to RDKit somewhere as well?

My Proposal consisted of the following steps:

- Select the AtomGroup via an input from the user via `u = mda.Universe("input.pdb")` to create an MDAnalysis Universe and `ag = u.select_atoms("resname UNK")` to select the `AtomGroup` 
with the molecule that needs to be displayed
- Convert the selected AtomGroup into an rdkit mol object via `ag.convert_to("RDKit")`
- Apply `Chem.RemoveHs` and `AllChem.Compute2DCoords` to obtain a 2D visualization of the molecule
- Display the molecule via `IpyWidgets` with different checkboxes, that by selection would highlight specific parts of the molecule

After discussion with the mentors and suggestions regarding how the code should be structured, it was decided that I would proceed with this suggestion and would apply the following steps with later on adding the additional
features in the `IpyWidgets` visualization, which would give the user important information in regards to the characteristics of the molecule that is being visualized.

## What I did

> I would divide this section into separate parts, each highlighting one of the important aspects of the work.

Reviewer 2: I don't think that sentence is necessary as is, I'd rather see the name of your resulting package, something like
```suggestion
The outcome of this GSoC program is a package called `mdonatello` which was created as follow:
```

### Main Visualization Code

> The main part of the code consisted of setting up the code for the visualization, which would allow the display of the molecule in a jupyter notebook. This is performed in the 

Reviewer 2: That section is a bit heavy to read, here's a suggestion (broken down because of line breaks):
```suggestion
The main part of the code consisted of setting up the widget for the visualization, which would allow the display of the molecule in a jupyter notebook. This is performed in the 
```

> `mdonatello.py`, which is mainly responsible for the visualization with it having the `class MoleculeVisualizer` that is the main class and responsible for the visualization with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`MoleculeVisualizer` class that is responsible for the visualization.
```
It's not necessary to specify in which file is the class.

> the functions in this class initializing the `IpyWidgets` interactive widgets such as a bar, that allows the user to select the molecule that he wants to display and also the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It initializes several interactive widgets from `IpyWidgets` such as a dropdown menu to select the molecule that the user wants to display and the
```

> interactive checkboxes with each having a feature, that I would explain in a separate section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
checkboxes that control the aspect of the image displayed, as explained in the next section.
```

This main code was the first part of the code that I designed and was in the beginning only able to display the molecule and had only one interactive checkbox, which displayed the atom
indices of the molecules, but as more and more features were added the visualization grew bigger and had more features that it needed to display.

### Feature Addition

The feature addition was the next step that I was working on and was mainly the biggest part of the project since there was always an additional interesting feature that could be added
that was proposed either by myself or one of the mentors.

The first feature addition that I was working on were the physiochemical properties as well as the number of hydrogen bond donors and acceptors of the molecule.

> After it was done I started adding features, which would by selecting the checkbox highlight the features mentioned in the checkbox. For example, I implemented pharmacophore checkboxes,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, I added checkboxes that would highlight the related features on the image. For example, I implemented pharmacophore checkboxes,
```

which by selection would highlight the selected pharmacophores, thus by selecting a hydrophobic feature, the atoms of the molecule that are hydrophobic via the `RDKit` pharmacophore
recognition were highlighted in the assigned colors.

Here is a short summary of features that I added for the visualization, which would show a value for the corresponding feature or adjust the figure of the molecule to display the values:

> - **Phyisochemical Properties**, **Atom Indices**, **Partial Charges**, **Hydrogen Bond Donors&Acceptors**

Reviewer 2: I'd split these items on a new bullet point for each, same below

Author: I was worried that the blog would be too big at some point, since I have now 200 lines and thought that it could go easily above 250/300, so this is why I put them each close to each other, since I wasn't sure if there is some limit for the blog size :)

And here is a short summary of features, that will highlight a specific atoms and bonds corresponding to their features if they are selected:

- **Rotatable Bonds**, **Partial Charge Heatmap**, **Functional Groups**, **Stereocenters**, **Murcko Scaffold**, **Pharmacophores**

> Here I would also address that for the pharmacophores there is a separate checkbox for each of the possible pharmacophore features, thus you can select the specific pharmaocphore feature

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is a separate checkbox for each pharmacophoric feature, thus you can select the specific feature
```
And you can put that sentence directly with the `- **Pharmacophores**` bullet point

that needs to be highlighted.

For the functional groups it currently uses SMART Patterns to identify certain functional groups and will then generate the checkboxes of the functional groups that were recognized and
by selecting them you are able to see the atoms of this functional group.

### Code Restructure

> This is also a section that was done throughout the whole project since in the beginning, the code was mainly consisting of functions in one file and this was one of the points that I was

Reviewer 2: This section is a long single sentence, could you break it down in shorter sentences? I'd also delete the last part of the sentence `where every file was distinctive from the other and had an important purpose and a clear structure` it repeats the bit earlier.

Also mention why it's useful to structure the code this way: by having each class/function having a single responsibility, the code is broken down in small manageable pieces that are easier to understand and maintain.

Author: Adjusted it :)

glad that my mentors helped me with since the code restructure allowed me to go from a code that was first based upon only function to structure it with classes and then in the end the
separate classes were moved into separate files, thus a clear structure of the code was created, where every file was distinctive from the other and had an important purpose and a clear
structure 

### Actions, Testing and Documentation

> This would be the final part of what I did and here I would put all these three parts together. Pytests were created for this project in addition to the code being uploaded to

Reviewer 2: Pytests is the name of the framework used for testing, I wouldn't use it as a noun, you could instead say:
```suggestion
This would be the final part of what I did and here I would put all these three parts together. A testsuite based on the [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/) framework was created for this project, in addition to the code being uploaded to
```

> [Codecov](https://app.codecov.io/gh/talagayev/mdonatello) to display the coverage of the code. Furthermore, an CI CD was created, which installs the package and tests the pytests on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Codecov](https://app.codecov.io/gh/talagayev/mdonatello) to display the coverage of the code. Furthermore, a CI CD was created, which installs the package and tests the pytests on
```

> [Codecov](https://app.codecov.io/gh/talagayev/mdonatello) to display the coverage of the code. Furthermore, a CI CD was created, which installs the package and tests the pytests on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Codecov](https://app.codecov.io/gh/talagayev/mdonatello) to display the coverage of the code. Furthermore, a CI CD workflow was created, which installs the package and runs the tests on
```

Linux, MacOS and Windows systems with the Python versions 3.10, 3.11 and 3.12 with different `IpyWidgets` versions, with the oldest supported version for this code being `7.6.4`. Finally,
a documentation based on the MDAKits Template was created and can be found here: https://mdonatello.readthedocs.io/

## Current State

> The current state of MDonatello is, that it is available and working, thus it can be easily installed and used on your system. Some improvements can be made, but overall

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MDonatello is available and can be installed and used on your system (see the [How to use it section](#how-to-use-it)). Some improvements are planned as explained below.
```

> the current version is stable and applicable.

Reviewer 2: I'd remove that sentence, `stable` has a specific meaning (the API and UI won't change much), but because this is the first release and you're still likely going to move things around, rename classes/functions...etc. this wouldn't really qualify as stable IMO.

Author: Yes makes sense, then I will remove it, somehow I though it meant that it runs without any crashes or errors.

## What code got merged (or not) upstream

There were multiple PRs created for this project, but they were merged to obtain a big and summarized [PR](https://github.com/talagayev/MDonatello/pull/1), which is also the version that is 
used in the [Release](https://github.com/talagayev/MDonatello/releases/tag/0.0.1)

## How to use it

Currently `MDonatello` is a separate package that can be git cloned and installed with the following steps:

First clone the repository:

```
git clone https://github.com/talagayev/MDonatello
```

Create a virtual environment and activate it:

```
conda create --name mdonatello
conda activate mdonatello
```

Then go into the MDonatello folder:

```
cd MDonatello
```

Finally this package from source:

```
pip install -e .
```

To use the **mdonatello** package you need to run a jupyter notebook, thus run the command:

```
jupyter notebook
```

Now that you started a jupyter notebook create a notebook file and enter the following command to use **mdonatello**:
Here you need to adjust the name of the PDB File to your PDB File and the resname of the molecule to your molecule

```python
import MDAnalysis as mda

> import mdonatello

Reviewer 2: That import statement shouldn't be needed since you're importing the class directly in the line below?

Author: yes you are right, somehow I usually import the package in a separate line and then the class that I use (more of a habit that I have in coding), but I can remove it :)

from mdonatello import MoleculeVisualizer

u = mda.Universe("input.pdb")
ag = u.select_atoms("resname UNK")
visualizer = MoleculeVisualizer(ag, show_atom_indices=False, width=-1, height=-1)
```

This would lead you to obtain the following display, where you could then select the molecule and checkboxes:

<img
src="/public/images/mdonatello_display.png"
title="MDonatello Display" alt="Example of MDonatello Display"
style="float: center; " />

## Lessons Learned During GSoC

Here I would highlight some lessons that I learned during GSoC2024:

- Have an Idea of the overall structure of the code
- Discuss the ideas with the mentors to see their opinion
- Don't be afraid to ask questions
- Try to work on different aspects of the code (in my case I was almost always only focusing on feature addition and needed to get reminded that there are other parts)
- Try to learn as much from the mentors and apply it in your code
- Getting a meeting with all mentors that have different time zones is sometimes tricky :)

> ## Conclusion &The Future

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Conclusion & The Future
```

- Adding the package to `MDAKits` and `conda-forge`
- New Features can be added

## Acknowledgements

I would like to thank [MDAnalysis](https://www.mdanalysis.org/) for giving me the opportunity to work on this project. The application process was very nice and detailed,
I liked it that during the application process. I was able to get to know the MDAnalysis code more and contribute to the code and get to know some people from the community
during this time.

I would like to thank Oliver Beckstein ([@orbeckst](https://github.com/orbeckst)) and Jenna M Swarthout Goddard([@jennaswa](https://github.com/jennaswa)) for the insights and help with the organization and structure during the application, I am glad that I was able to contribute to MDAnalysis with this project.

I would also like to thank my mentors Cédric Bouysset ([@cbouy](https://github.com/cbouy)), Richard Gowers ([@richardjgowers](https://github.com/richardjgowers)) and Yuxuan Zhuang ([@yuxuanzhuang](https://github.com/yuxuanzhuang)), who helped me a lot during the project, with their helpful and insightful mentoring. I am glad, that I was able to learn from you and it helped me to improve

> my coding skills. Also, shotout to Hugo MacDermott-Opeskin ([@hmacdope](https://github.com/hmacdope)) for his help with the PR requests during the application process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
my coding skills. Also, shoutout to Hugo MacDermott-Opeskin ([@hmacdope](https://github.com/hmacdope)) for his help with the PR requests during the application process.
```

Author: Damn, sorry for the typo errors, I checked it beforehand and thought that there were no typo errors left :crying_cat_face:

> Finally, I would also like to thank Google for offering this program and supporting open-source software.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, I would also like to thank [Google](https://opensource.google/) for offering this program and supporting open-source software.
```
